---
version: 6.1.0
baseline: 6.0.1
date: 2026-05-05
summary:
    This is a stable update that introduces a number of features and fixes for
    various bugs and regressions found in 6.0.1 and earlier
draft: true
---

* Improved keystore locking mechanism
* Re-introduction of NSS based user/group lookups and other related fixes
* Support for literal and one-shot macros through a new macro modifier syntax
* New `%define` options for expansion at definition and global context
* Improved and fixed build and verification error handling
* Improved and fixed *rpm-plugin-syslog*(8)
* Fixed Clang compilation errors and warnings
* New [release model](../2026/05/05/release-cycle.html), inspired by the Linux
  kernel
* New man pages

# Transactions

* The keystore now grabs a separate lock instead of the transaction lock. This
  fixes a regression in 6.0.0 where all rpmdb queries would be blocked during
  transactions. (#4110)

* File descriptors are now closed in a more efficient way on Linux 5.11+ with
  glibc 2.34+. This improves performance by about 26% in time spent doing an
  install transaction. (#4149)

* User and group lookups are now done through NSS again on glibc-based systems,
  after being somewhat eagerly disabled in 4.19.0. This can still be disabled
  manually by defining the `%_passwd_path` and `%_group_path` macros (both
  undefined in the stock configuration now). NSS lookups remain disabled
  unconditionally in `--root` operations. (#3994)

* In addition to packages, users and groups can now also be provided by the
  system runtime environment (NSS). (#4057)

# Macro Processor

* Macro behavior can now be altered by supplying _modifiers_ at definition
  time. This new syntax consists of a list of arguments enclosed in `<` and `>`
  that follows the macro name. Currently, two modifiers are supported:
  *literal* (`l`) and *one-shot* (`o`) expansion. See *rpm-macros*(7) for
  details. (#4145) (#1155)

* `%define` now accepts the new `-e` and `-g` options for expanding the macro
  body at the time of definition and placing the macro in the global context,
  respectively. Combining them together is equivalent to using `%global`.
  (#4163)

* `rpm --undefine` and Lua `rpm.undefine()` have been fixed to no longer bypass
  sanity checks. (#4133)

# Building Packages

* The build script environment is now exported to the `rpmbuild.env` file in
  the `%{builddir}`. This shell-sourceable file makes it easier for other
  programs to mimic, and work with, the build script environment. (#3147)

* The *rpmuncompress*(1) utility now honors the *rpm-common*(8) options and has
  support for CAR files.

* Both *rpmuncompress*(1) and *rpm-setup-autosign*(1) have been moved to the
  standard `$PATH` to make them easier to use as standalone tools.

* When trying to package binaries that don't match the package's architecture
  (such as in a noarch package), the error message now includes the actual
  filenames and their type, for easier troubleshooting. (#3600)

* *rpmbuild*(1) can now short-circuit to the `%check` stage with the new `k`
  target stage argument. (#3015)

* Missing patch or source files now cause a build error and include the line
  number again (regression in 4.20.0). (#4079)

* Lua scripts no longer crash when run from a non-RPM generated package
  (regression in 4.20.1). (#4189)

* Prevent buffer overruns in `findPreambleTag()` for language string.

* Remove upper bound on locale filename length.
  ([RhBug:2437509](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2437509))

# Signing & Verifying Packages

* *rpmsign*(1) can now sign files with PKCS11 tokens. (#4124)

* *rpmkeys*(8) has been fixed so that the exit code can no longer wrap around
  and thus potentially return 0 on failure. (#4176)

* The excessive, misleading and/or wrong output in various verification
  scenarios has been fixed. (#3303) (#4036)

# Plugins

* *rpm-plugin-syslog*(8) has been fixed to no longer show misleading operation
  names or emit duplicate messages. Additionally, the program name shown in the
  messages has been changed from `[RPM]` to `rpm` for easier greppability. With
  these tweaks, the `journalctl -t rpm` command now serves as an easy way to
  look at the transaction history. (#4172) (#1254)

# Manuals

* A number of new man pages have been added, some written from scratch while
  others based on the older (and often outdated) reference manual (#3612):
    * *elfdeps*(1)
    * *rpm-dependency-generators*(7)
    * *rpm-design*(7)
    * *rpm-scriptlets*(7)
    * *rpm-sysusers*(7)

* The *rpmbuild*(1) man page now has a section on the build process.

* The *rpmkeys*(8) man page now also covers the overall verification policy.

# API

* Lua scriptlets now honor the `rpmtsSetScriptFd()` function call which makes
  it possible to redirect their standard output and error to a file descriptor.
  (#3328)

* The plugin hooks `psm_pre` and `psm_post` are now only executed for the main
  package operations (install, erase and restore). (#1254)

* New `rpmKeyringVerifySig3()` function that also returns lints. (#4069)

* New `rpm.ds.Ti()` Python binding for retrieving current trigger index.

* Tag extensions can now be used in rpmdb pattern matching. (#4077)

* `rpmtxnImportPubkey()` now reflects the error code from `pgpPubKeyLint()` in
  its own return code. (#4096)

* The IO engine specified in `Fdopen()` is now validated. (#3058)

* Various `rpm.ds` fixes in Python bindings. (#3943)

# Building RPM

* All Clang compilation errors and warnings have been fixed. This achieves a
  clean build when using the Clang toolchain. (#4070) (#4105)

* A macOS build regression in 6.0.1 has been fixed. (#4139)

* Some handy CMake configuration presets have been added. (#4118)
